TODO.md, before:

# notebook

* number the cells?
* store the last value in a variable (LAST)
* delete, insert, copy cells
* join adjacent cells
* split cell
* after reload, show the results in gray, only when they are freshly computed in the current session change color to black
* toggle between dark/light mode
* toggle right hand pane containing list of functions and documentation
* toggle right or bottom pane with standard input/output (i.e. a textarea...)
* export cells as one consolidated program text
* run calculation in async
* syntax highlighting in div and textarea! at least keywords.
* notebook should have offline and online mode. In offline mode, everything is saved in the browser (as it is currently). In online mode, reached after logging in, the notebooks are saved on the server. It is possible to choose per notebook whether it should be online or offline.

# language

* js: maybe rename isEquals() to equals(), seems to be the canonical name for the equality function
* parse_json should support fileinput values and read only as much as is needed.
* destructuring assign should support more than just identifiers, also a->b, a[b], a(b)[c], a(b)->c and so on
* spreading works in funcalls and lists. What about sets and maps? Can we implement this?

* run unittests for modules, how? in a function, require the module, iterate over the object keys...
* revisit all function names, make them more consistent, provide legacy module for older names
* support relative paths (relative to the current module/script!)
* set module import path using a command line argument (or interpreter parameter)

* rework unittests to run per module (without legacy!)
* add much more unit tests and unify them across all plattforms

* expand list comprehensions to include more than one for-loop, e.g. 
  [[x, y] for x in xs for y in ys if x < y] which processes for each x all y (i.e. the cartesian product)
  [[x, y] for x in xs and y in ys]          which processes the xs and ys in parallel (providing NULL if one list is longer)

* Can we prevent loops in toString due to recursive data structures? In objects by using _str_, but in general? This is important, because in stacktraces the objects get printed!
  One possibility would be to add a level into toString and only print up to a certain level (i.e. 3 or 4?) This might also be configurable. If called with initial level -1
  it would be without limit, thus we could still handle string(val) in a general manner, but in e.g. stacktraces, we would limit it.

* add new function file_copy, file_move, get_env, execute to js
* create new module OS and move get_env, execute and file handling function there
* add information about the operating system in the OS module
  * operating system name (windows, ...)
  * operating system version
  * PS (path separator, /, \)
  * LS (line separator, \n, \r\n)
  * FS (field separator, :, ;)
* add function which to OS module, which searches for an executable in the OS path and
  optionally in additional locations. This should handle os differences gracefully,
  i.e. which("javac") should find javac.exe on windows and javac on linux/mac.

Commit message:

Add new file system functions to ckl-js

TODO.md, after:

# notebook

* number the cells?
* store the last value in a variable (LAST)
* delete, insert, copy cells
* join adjacent cells
* split cell
* after reload, show the results in gray, only when they are freshly computed in the current session change color to black
* toggle between dark/light mode
* toggle right hand pane containing list of functions and documentation
* toggle right or bottom pane with standard input/output (i.e. a textarea...)
* export cells as one consolidated program text
* run calculation in async
* syntax highlighting in div and textarea! at least keywords.
* notebook should have offline and online mode. In offline mode, everything is saved in the browser (as it is currently). In online mode, reached after logging in, the notebooks are saved on the server. It is possible to choose per notebook whether it should be online or offline.

# collab

A webpage useable for collaboration between two persons. Basically
it looks like a notebook, but with two notebook panes. One for us
and one for the collaboration partner. Both participants see both
notebooks but can only edit their own. It is possible to snatch cells
from the other notebook into our own (with e.g. :<12 to fetch the
twelfth cell from the other notebook).

All this implies that a shared state exists on the server. Thus, one
participant opens a session, this generates a random session id. The
other participant enters this session id to join the session. Then, whenever
anyone edits anything, the changes are transmitted to the server and from
there to the other participant. Thus, the notebook contents is always keep
synchronized. Also, the execution of a cell and its results has to be
communicated. Never will code from the other person be executed in our
own session! We also have only one interperter instance per participant.
This is important for security reasons: it should not be possible for
the other participant to execute code on our machine/browser.

# language

* js: maybe rename isEquals() to equals(), seems to be the canonical name for the equality function
* parse_json should support fileinput values and read only as much as is needed.
* destructuring assign should support more than just identifiers, also a->b, a[b], a(b)[c], a(b)->c and so on
* spreading works in funcalls and lists. What about sets and maps? Can we implement this?

* run unittests for modules, how? in a function, require the module, iterate over the object keys...
* revisit all function names, make them more consistent, provide legacy module for older names
* support relative paths (relative to the current module/script!)
* set module import path using a command line argument (or interpreter parameter)

* rework unittests to run per module (without legacy!)
* add much more unit tests and unify them across all plattforms

* expand list comprehensions to include more than one for-loop, e.g. 
  [[x, y] for x in xs for y in ys if x < y] which processes for each x all y (i.e. the cartesian product)
  [[x, y] for x in xs and y in ys]          which processes the xs and ys in parallel (providing NULL if one list is longer)

* Can we prevent loops in toString due to recursive data structures? In objects by using _str_, but in general? This is important, because in stacktraces the objects get printed!
  One possibility would be to add a level into toString and only print up to a certain level (i.e. 3 or 4?) This might also be configurable. If called with initial level -1
  it would be without limit, thus we could still handle string(val) in a general manner, but in e.g. stacktraces, we would limit it.

* create new module OS and move get_env, execute and file handling function there
* add information about the operating system in the OS module
  * operating system name (windows, ...)
  * operating system version
  * PS (path separator, /, \)
  * LS (line separator, \n, \r\n)
  * FS (field separator, :, ;)
* add function which to OS module, which searches for an executable in the OS path and
  optionally in additional locations. This should handle os differences gracefully,
  i.e. which("javac") should find javac.exe on windows and javac on linux/mac.
